README.md, before:

# Flight Rules

An opinionated framework for AI-assisted software development. Provides conventions for docs, implementation specs, and coding session workflows that both humans and agents can navigate.

The goal:  
Any agent (or person) should be able to open a project that uses Flight Rules and understand:

- What the project is trying to do
- How the implementation is structured
- What has already been done
- What should happen next
- What we've learned along the way

---

## How It Works

This repo contains the **source template** that gets installed into your projects.

| This Repo | Your Project |
|-----------|--------------|
| `src/` | `.flight-rules/` |
| `tools/` | Scripts/prompts that generate coding agent-specific adapters |

Everything in `src/` gets copied to your project as `.flight-rules/`. The `tools/` directory contains scripts or prompts that can generate coding agent-specific adapter files (like `AGENTS.md` or `.cursor/rules` for Cursor or `CLAUDE.md` or `.claude/rules` for Claude Code) in your project root.

---

## What Gets Installed

When you install Flight Rules into a project, you get:

```text
your-project/
├── AGENTS.md                 # (Optional) Adapter for Cursor - points to .flight-rules/
└── .flight-rules/
    ├── AGENTS.md             # Agent guidelines (the real content)
    ├── docs/
    │   ├── prd.md            # Product requirements (you fill this in)
    │   ├── implementation/   # Implementation specs
    │   │   └── overview.md
    │   ├── progress.md       # High-level progress log
    │   ├── critical-learnings.md
    │   └── session_logs/     # Session documentation
    ├── commands/
    │   ├── start-coding-session.md
    │   └── end-coding-session.md
    └── prompts/              # Reusable prompt templates
```

---

## Core Concepts

### 1. The `.flight-rules/` Directory

All Flight Rules content lives in a single hidden directory at your project root. This keeps things organized and clearly separates "Flight Rules stuff" from your actual code.

Inside `.flight-rules/`:

- **`AGENTS.md`** – The main agent guidelines
- **`docs/`** – Project documentation (PRD, specs, progress, learnings)
- **`commands/`** – Workflow commands (start/end coding session)
- **`prompts/`** – Reusable prompt templates

### 2. Implementation Specs (Single Source of Truth)

Implementation specs are organized into a three-level hierarchy under `.flight-rules/docs/implementation/`:

| Level | Name | Example | Description |
|-------|------|---------|-------------|
| 1 | **Area** | `1-foundation-shell/` | A major implementation area |
| 2 | **Task Group** | `1.4-application-shell.md` | A file containing related tasks |
| 3 | **Task** | `1.4.1. Routing Structure` | A specific unit of work with status |

- `overview.md` lists all Areas
- Each Area directory contains Task Group files (`{N}.{M}-topic.md`)
- Each Task Group file contains individual Tasks with their own status

**Key principle:** The spec is the single source of truth. If code diverges from spec, update the spec.

### 3. Coding Sessions

Flight Rules distinguishes between:

- **Ad-hoc requests** – "Change function X in file Y"
- **Structured sessions** – Follow a start/end ritual with documentation

Two core flows:

- **`start-coding-session`** – Review context, set goals, create a plan
- **`end-coding-session`** – Summarize work, update progress, capture learnings

Session documentation goes in `.flight-rules/docs/session_logs/`. Agents don't start these flows on their own; you explicitly invoke them.

### 4. Versioning

Each project tracks which Flight Rules version it uses:

```
flight_rules_version: 0.1
```

This appears in `.flight-rules/AGENTS.md` and helps coordinate upgrades.

---

## This Repo's Structure

```text
.
├── README.md                 # This file
├── src/                      # THE TEMPLATE - everything here ships to projects
│   ├── AGENTS.md             # Agent guidelines
│   ├── docs/
│   │   ├── prd.md
│   │   ├── implementation/
│   │   │   └── overview.md
│   │   ├── progress.md
│   │   ├── critical-learnings.md
│   │   └── session_logs/     # Session documentation
│   ├── commands/
│   │   ├── start-coding-session.md
│   │   └── end-coding-session.md
│   └── prompts/
│       └── .gitkeep
└── tools/                    # Scripts/prompts to generate tool-specific adapters
    ├── cursor-agents.md      # Generates AGENTS.md for Cursor
    └── claude-md.md          # Generates CLAUDE.md for Claude Code
```

**Key insight:** Everything in `src/` is template content. Everything else is repo infrastructure.

---

## Installing (Manual)

Until there's a dedicated installer CLI:

1. **Clone this repo** somewhere convenient:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/ryanpacker/flight-rules.git ~/flight-rules
   ```

2. **Copy the source template** into your project:

   ```bash
   cd /path/to/your/project
   cp -R ~/flight-rules/src .flight-rules
   ```

3. **Generate tool adapters** (optional, based on what AI tools you use):

   Use the scripts or prompts in `tools/` to generate adapter files for your specific AI tools. These adapters create files like `AGENTS.md` (for Cursor), or `CLAUDE.md` (for Claude Code) at your project root that point to `.flight-rules/`.

4. **Customize your project:**

   - Edit `.flight-rules/docs/prd.md` – Define your product requirements
   - Edit `.flight-rules/docs/implementation/overview.md` – Define implementation areas

5. **Start working:**

   - Use normal prompts for small tasks
   - Say "start coding session" or "end coding session" for structured work

---

## Upgrading

When Flight Rules evolves, upgrade by copying the latest source:

```bash
cd /path/to/your/project
cp -R ~/flight-rules/src/* .flight-rules/
```

This works because:

- Template files contain no project-specific content
- Your project content (PRD, specs, session logs) won't be overwritten
- The version marker will update to reflect the new version

---

## Day-to-Day Usage

### When you open a project

1. Agents should read `.flight-rules/AGENTS.md`
2. Skim `.flight-rules/docs/prd.md` and `implementation/overview.md`
3. Check `.flight-rules/docs/progress.md` for recent work

### For structured work

- **"start coding session"** – Sets goals, creates a plan
- **"end coding session"** – Summarizes work, updates docs

### When making changes

- Identify relevant Area, Task Group, and Task
- Update Tasks when reality diverges from plan
- Keep `Status:` fields current

---

## Future Directions

Not yet defined:

- **Installer CLI** – Script to install/upgrade Flight Rules
- **Skills/MCP integration** – Conventions for documenting tools and workflows
- **Hosted planning systems** – Potential integration with Linear, etc.

For now, the focus is:

- A solid, Markdown-based structure
- Clear expectations for agents
- A path to automation later

Commit message:

docs: standardize terminology from 'tool' to 'agent'
Replace 'tool-specific' with 'agent-specific' and 'AI tools' with
'AI coding agents' for consistency across documentation.

README.md, after:

# Flight Rules

An opinionated framework for AI-assisted software development. Provides conventions for docs, implementation specs, and coding session workflows that both humans and agents can navigate.

The goal:  
Any agent (or person) should be able to open a project that uses Flight Rules and understand:

- What the project is trying to do
- How the implementation is structured
- What has already been done
- What should happen next
- What we've learned along the way

---

## How It Works

This repo contains the **source template** that gets installed into your projects.

| This Repo | Your Project |
|-----------|--------------|
| `src/` | `.flight-rules/` |
| `tools/` | Scripts/prompts that generate coding agent-specific adapters |

Everything in `src/` gets copied to your project as `.flight-rules/`. The `tools/` directory contains scripts or prompts that can generate coding agent-specific adapter files (like `AGENTS.md` or `.cursor/rules` for Cursor or `CLAUDE.md` or `.claude/rules` for Claude Code) in your project root.

---

## What Gets Installed

When you install Flight Rules into a project, you get:

```text
your-project/
├── AGENTS.md                 # (Optional) Adapter for Cursor - points to .flight-rules/
└── .flight-rules/
    ├── AGENTS.md             # Agent guidelines (the real content)
    ├── docs/
    │   ├── prd.md            # Product requirements (you fill this in)
    │   ├── implementation/   # Implementation specs
    │   │   └── overview.md
    │   ├── progress.md       # High-level progress log
    │   ├── critical-learnings.md
    │   └── session_logs/     # Session documentation
    ├── commands/
    │   ├── start-coding-session.md
    │   └── end-coding-session.md
    └── prompts/              # Reusable prompt templates
```

---

## Core Concepts

### 1. The `.flight-rules/` Directory

All Flight Rules content lives in a single hidden directory at your project root. This keeps things organized and clearly separates "Flight Rules stuff" from your actual code.

Inside `.flight-rules/`:

- **`AGENTS.md`** – The main agent guidelines
- **`docs/`** – Project documentation (PRD, specs, progress, learnings)
- **`commands/`** – Workflow commands (start/end coding session)
- **`prompts/`** – Reusable prompt templates

### 2. Implementation Specs (Single Source of Truth)

Implementation specs are organized into a three-level hierarchy under `.flight-rules/docs/implementation/`:

| Level | Name | Example | Description |
|-------|------|---------|-------------|
| 1 | **Area** | `1-foundation-shell/` | A major implementation area |
| 2 | **Task Group** | `1.4-application-shell.md` | A file containing related tasks |
| 3 | **Task** | `1.4.1. Routing Structure` | A specific unit of work with status |

- `overview.md` lists all Areas
- Each Area directory contains Task Group files (`{N}.{M}-topic.md`)
- Each Task Group file contains individual Tasks with their own status

**Key principle:** The spec is the single source of truth. If code diverges from spec, update the spec.

### 3. Coding Sessions

Flight Rules distinguishes between:

- **Ad-hoc requests** – "Change function X in file Y"
- **Structured sessions** – Follow a start/end ritual with documentation

Two core flows:

- **`start-coding-session`** – Review context, set goals, create a plan
- **`end-coding-session`** – Summarize work, update progress, capture learnings

Session documentation goes in `.flight-rules/docs/session_logs/`. Agents don't start these flows on their own; you explicitly invoke them.

### 4. Versioning

Each project tracks which Flight Rules version it uses:

```
flight_rules_version: 0.1
```

This appears in `.flight-rules/AGENTS.md` and helps coordinate upgrades.

---

## This Repo's Structure

```text
.
├── README.md                 # This file
├── src/                      # THE TEMPLATE - everything here ships to projects
│   ├── AGENTS.md             # Agent guidelines
│   ├── docs/
│   │   ├── prd.md
│   │   ├── implementation/
│   │   │   └── overview.md
│   │   ├── progress.md
│   │   ├── critical-learnings.md
│   │   └── session_logs/     # Session documentation
│   ├── commands/
│   │   ├── start-coding-session.md
│   │   └── end-coding-session.md
│   └── prompts/
│       └── .gitkeep
└── tools/                    # Scripts/prompts to generate coding agent-specific adapters
    ├── cursor-agents.md      # Generates AGENTS.md for Cursor
    └── claude-md.md          # Generates CLAUDE.md for Claude Code
```

**Key insight:** Everything in `src/` is template content. Everything else is repo infrastructure.

---

## Installing (Manual)

Until there's a dedicated installer CLI:

1. **Clone this repo** somewhere convenient:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/ryanpacker/flight-rules.git ~/flight-rules
   ```

2. **Copy the source template** into your project:

   ```bash
   cd /path/to/your/project
   cp -R ~/flight-rules/src .flight-rules
   ```

3. **Generate coding agent specific adapters** (optional, based on what AI tools you use):

   Use the scripts or prompts in `tools/` to generate adapter files for your specific AI coding agents. These adapters create files like `AGENTS.md` (for Cursor), or `CLAUDE.md` (for Claude Code) at your project root that point to `.flight-rules/`.

4. **Customize your project:**

   - Edit `.flight-rules/docs/prd.md` – Define your product requirements
   - Edit `.flight-rules/docs/implementation/overview.md` – Define implementation areas

5. **Start working:**

   - Use normal prompts for small tasks
   - Say "start coding session" or "end coding session" for structured work

---

## Upgrading

When Flight Rules evolves, upgrade by copying the latest source:

```bash
cd /path/to/your/project
cp -R ~/flight-rules/src/* .flight-rules/
```

This works because:

- Template files contain no project-specific content
- Your project content (PRD, specs, session logs) won't be overwritten
- The version marker will update to reflect the new version

---

## Day-to-Day Usage

### When you open a project

1. Agents should read `.flight-rules/AGENTS.md`
2. Skim `.flight-rules/docs/prd.md` and `implementation/overview.md`
3. Check `.flight-rules/docs/progress.md` for recent work

### For structured work

- **"start coding session"** – Sets goals, creates a plan
- **"end coding session"** – Summarizes work, updates docs

### When making changes

- Identify relevant Area, Task Group, and Task
- Update Tasks when reality diverges from plan
- Keep `Status:` fields current

---

## Future Directions

Not yet defined:

- **Installer CLI** – Script to install/upgrade Flight Rules
- **Skills/MCP integration** – Conventions for documenting tools and workflows
- **Hosted planning systems** – Potential integration with Linear, etc.

For now, the focus is:

- A solid, Markdown-based structure
- Clear expectations for agents
- A path to automation later
